a year from now when the app's growing
and we have lots of customers and we're
trying to add new features. Are we going
to be kicking ourselves for setting it
up in this particular way, the only
other option would be to kind of go
ahead and do it while not feeling
confident that it was the right choice,
if you see what I mean, which just that
option just isn't really an option. We
risked having an app that broke, which
no one wants. This is Recordables, a
place where the 37 signals team shares
their behind-the-scenes work building
products like Base Camp, Hey, Fizzy, and
open-source products. We are sharing the
behind the scenes of what we've done,
how we've done it, so you can learn from
us, and avoid some of the mistakes we've
made. I'm Kimberly with my trusty
co-host in tech, Fernando. Hello,
Fernando.
>> Hello. Hello. We talked recently with
Mike Delesio about Rails multi-tenant
structure of working with databases.
This week we're diving a little bit
deeper specifically into Fizzy and the
infrastructure that we investigated with
that product and ended up using. So to
do that we have Kevin McConnell from our
programming team. Kevin, welcome to
Recordables. Well, before we dive into
the fizzy infrastructure, tell us a
little bit about you, how long you've
worked here, and then we'll dive into
the topic at hand.
>> Sure. Um so yeah I'm a programmer here
at 37 signals. I've worked um here for I
think coming up on four years something
like that. Um
>> nice
>> first for probably about the first year
I worked on kind of across a few of the
products worked on hay for a while
worked on base camp a little bit not
actually a lot but a little bit um and
then I kind of joined the team building
the once uh products which was part of
what we'll we'll learn more about this I
think when we talk a bit more about the
architecture but some of the things we
explored in fizzy they sort of started
out life as part of the things we
explored in once and kind of grew from
there. Uh so yeah, so that was like kind
of my first I would say the first three
years were um working on some of the
products and working on the ones for a
couple of years and then the last sort
of year and a bit has been more busy.
>> Okay, awesome. And I feel like we could
do a whole episode just about the ones
products and how that all came to be.
But we're going to talk a little bit
more about Fizzy today. Let's start
maybe with why we wanted to even
investigate a different infrastructure,
what we were trying to accomplish, and
we'll go from there.
>> Sure. Um so there were there were really
two reasons for it. I think there was
one initial reason. Um and that's
actually the part that ties back to the
one stuff like I was saying. So the the
ones products the idea behind those was
that
um where most of our products are
normally SAS based and people you know
people subscribe we run all the software
on our hardware and people use it. Um
the once project was sort of an
experiment to see maybe people would
like to buy software and run it
themselves. Kind of like the way people
used to buy software back in the day,
>> right?
>> So the notion was instead of
subscribing, you'd pay once. But there's
also this um that was part of it. Kind
of the business side, I guess, was like
pay once rather than subscribing. But
the technical side is run it yourself
rather than rather than us running it
for you. And when we did those those
products, it was quite interesting. But
I think we found that some people really
gravitated towards the idea of running
things themselves. And so when it came
time to start working on Fizzy, having
done that a little bit, we had this idea
about should we make a product that you
could do either. Um so rather than be
like base cap is subscription but
Capfire is once, it's like what if Fizzy
was a thing where you could choose? you
could pay for it once up front and you
would own it your own copy and you could
run it yourselves or you could just use
a normal SAS subscription thing and so
that's what led us into exploring
architecture as a way to answer that
because normally there you would build
things slightly differently for those
two use cases if you see I mean so like
campfire the first ones product that
ships it's very self-contained as a
docker container uh runs SQL light so
it's kind of like maintenancefree on the
database side um everything that it
needs to do is built into a single
Docker container. It's really easy to
run it. But for a SAS application,
that's not what you would typically do.
You would normally use um database
servers that could hold data for lots of
accounts at the same time. They would be
separate from your application server.
You'd spread things out a lot more. Your
job servers would be different than your
application servers and that kind of
thing. And so this was one of the one of
the angles for looking at new
architecture for Fizzy was if we want it
to work in both places, how what should
we build to do that? Should it be the
same thing that works in two? Should it
sort of be kind of switchable in some
way where you could change it depending
on how like you could package it
differently for sales as a one-off
versus us running a SAS. So th those
were the questions for one for one part
of it.
>> I would imagine too there's like the
maintenance question of like keeping two
versions for multiple people in
different ways consistent with each
other.
>> Yeah, that's that's definitely part of
it. like any anywhere you've kind of
made a branch where you say if in this
situation we're doing it this way and in
the other situation we're doing it the
other way then you're kind of
potentially making things difficult for
the future because you've got to make
sure why any change you make has to work
in both sort of thing but that that was
half of the reason the other reason for
exploring the new architecture was
really more about sort of speed and
performance and I think this that it
wasn't the first reason for us to look
at new architecture but once we had that
other reason the once thing and we
started thinking about the ways is we
might solve it. It occurred to us that
some of them would have an impact on
performance. And then I think we sort of
changed gears a little bit and started
chasing this idea of how can we make
this really fast and that became just as
much if not more of a driver of
exploring new architectures. A big part
of that really is just about it's about
where you put data locality of data to
people. So normally when we run SAS
applications the database lives
somewhere geographically and you can we
can we can use things like read replicas
to make copies of it nearer different
locations but essentially you have one
main copy of your data somewhere. Um so
that could be in something like Chicago.
The further you are from that the slower
the app's going to feel to you just
because of the latency the sort of speed
of light limits and so on. And this is
something that comes up a lot, I think,
because the the kinds of speeds that you
have to reach for an app to feel fast
are short enough that common distances
are too long for that to feel fast, if
you see what I mean. So like for me in
Edinburgh, if I'm if I have to uh use an
application that's running out of
Chicago, say, then realistically it's
there's probably like 100 to 150
milliseconds of latency for me to like
send anything there and back before
before the server even like does any
work. Just the time for the for my
request to get there and come back. Like
the the theoretical speed of light
latency would be a bit less than that.
It'd be like 60 or something probably.
But in practice, it's going to be like
150 milliseconds to do like nothing. If
if you're actually doing something like
rendering a page that takes 50
milliseconds to render, then that's 200
milliseconds for every request. And in
practice, I think it usually feels like
if you can get your pages to render like
all your requests to complete in like
100 milliseconds or less, then the app
feels nice and fast. like more than 100
start to feel slow. More than about 200,
you really feel like something slow is
happening there. And so this is an issue
that's kind of it's hard to avoid if you
have all your data in one place just
because there's going to be a bunch of
people where no matter how fast you make
the bits of your app, they're going to
feel it's going to feel slow to them
just because they're far away. But if
you took like for my situation being in
Edinburgh, one of the other places that
we run servers out of at the moment is
Amsterdam. So if we moved everything to
Amsterdam, it would be fast for me
because my round trip to Amsterdam and
back is like 25 milliseconds or
something. So that 50 millisecond page
that we talked about plus 25
milliseconds of round trip is is nicely
under that 100 millisecond thing. Does
that that kind of make sense, right?
>> Yeah. Yeah. The threshold. So that was a
a little bit of a tangent, but thinking
about that stuff was what what got us to
think about as we're exploring different
architectures for running self-hosted
applications and SAS applications. Maybe
we could take something from the model
of the self-hosted ones where people
would run things on their own servers
next to themselves. Their data was right
was generally right next to them. Right?
If you're going to self-host something,
you might be running on a server that's
in your office or closet. Or if you rent
something on a cloud provider, you can
pick a region that's near you or
something and you get the fastest data.
When it's SAS, typically you plop it in
one place and that's where the data is
for everybody. So some for some people
it's fast, for some people it's slow. So
we started to think about maybe we could
take something from this self-hosted
model. So even when we run it as SAS,
can we set it up somehow? So we put
people's data near where those people
are and then everyone gets a faster
application.
>> And how did that go?
>> Answering that is jumping right to the
end of the whole story probably.
[laughter]
Um so spoilers.
>> Yeah, I don't know if you want to kind
of go through there bit by bit or just
answer it. But I will say that you can
quite easily make reading data local to
people because you can take databases
and replicate all the data. So whenever
you make a change um in the place where
the data is normally kept like all the
copies can go to different data centers
and then whenever someone has to read
their data they can just read from one
of those read copies and that's near
them and it's fast. This is basically
what we've ended up doing. We do this in
other apps as well and in fizzy where we
landed in the end is what we do. So all
the writes are still happening centrally
in one place but all your reads come
from the closest reader that there is to
you. It actually works out pretty good
in practice because most web
applications
do far more reads than writes. Um, a lot
of it is just because the way you use
apps, you tend to click around and look
a lot of things and every now and again
you'll change something. But the ratio
of reading to writing is really heavily
skewed to reading. I think base camp I
once looked and it was uh something like
94% reads, like 6% rights.
>> That makes sense. So, so even if all you
make faster is the reads, you've already
helped most of the things most of the
time.
>> There's also, I think, a bit of a
perception about it where
>> you kind of like changes that you make.
It's okay sometimes it's okay for them
to feel a bit slower because it feels
like you did something if you see what I
mean like like if you're sending an
email, if you click a button to send the
email and it took half a second or
something to happen, it wouldn't feel
that bad. But if you've if you're trying
to read through a set of pages on a
website and every time you click on a
new page it takes half a second to come
up. [clears throat]
>> That that does feel slow. So yeah, we
ended up focusing on speeding up reads
by making them local and not worrying
too much about trying to divide up the
data and move it uh around to make local
writes because that's where a lot of the
complexity is from. Um, but like I say,
that's jumping to the end of the story
because the way what we set out to do at
the start was exactly split up
everything and put reads and writes
closer to people.
>> Yeah. So, Kevin, let's start there on
like what did we try or what were the
things we thought about in terms of like
here are our options for this new
infrastructure.
>> There were three I think kind of three
things that we thought were worth
trying initially. um one of them
wouldn't have helped so much with the
speed but more just about the packaging
of the two different ways of using the
software and that was just to basically
squeeze all the things we need on the
SAS side into the self-hosted side. So
like when we made the once applications
they ran on SQLite because it's nice and
easy and convenient. Um we don't run SAS
applications on SQLite typically because
it's a lot easier to sort of scale
things when you have separate database
servers and um we have a lot of
experience with making my SQL run really
fast. So we usually use that. So one of
the options that we had would be
just take the way we would do in SAS
take my SQL and everything and squeeze
those into the self-hosted version. So
we don't have to have two different ways
of running software but people can still
buy it and run it themselves. that would
have helped with the packaging sort of
side, but it doesn't really change
anything about the speed. So, that
wasn't the one that we decided to go to
first.
Another one that we kind of considered
but quickly I think decided not to
pursue is that
because we knew how these self-hosted
apps worked when running as individual
Docker containers which is the way the
one stuff works. We could always just
basically host everyone's own copy of
the app on the SAS side in the same way.
we could run a whole bunch of Docker
containers so that everyone who bought
it would have their own little container
and that's what we would run um to
access things which is like in theory
quite nice conceptually but in practice
quite complicated because it'd be really
inefficient like to do it naively would
be very inefficient because there's a
lot of overhead in every container and
if you have like 100,000 customers
running 100,000 Docker containers would
be a huge waste of resources because
most of them wouldn't be active all of
the time and you'd be like using up a
bunch of memory and CPU for things that
don't really aren't really kind of being
used if you see what I mean. Even for
customers that are active, there's a lot
of idle time between actions usually. So
like you you do something and then you
don't do anything for a few seconds and
then you do something else. And if you
kept like a container running all the
time, it's just it's just going to be
very inefficient to do. And so to make
that work, you end up having to invent
ways to do things like have containers
that you can run but then put to sleep
between between requests and then wake
them up really fast when the next
request comes in, which some things do.
You'd basically be reinventing the
fly.io service, which is kind of what
what they do is like run containers
everywhere. The thing that would have
been nice about that would be that we
could put them anywhere and they would
have the data alongside all the app
servers and job servers and everything
they need to run. So we could spread
them around and let people run their
version just like they would
self-hosted. We would just be kind of
self-hosting it for them if you see what
I mean. But as I say that isn't
something we pursued because I think
getting that to work in an efficient way
is quite it's quite a big project. So
then the third way which is the one that
we did decide to pursue um and looked at
quite seriously for a while [snorts] was
the idea of giving everyone their own
database but running those databases in
inside the normal sort of setup of app
servers that we would normally have. So
we might have half a dozen servers
running Rails that would normally talk
to one MySQL database with everybody's
data, but instead we would have half a
dozen web servers running Rails that
would talk to lots of little MySQL
databases. Each one would be one
customer's data. And we could put those
databases and those app servers wherever
we want. They don't have to be in the
same central place because they're
separate files. Um, and it felt like a
nice a nice thing to look into because
then we get this sort of isolation of of
data. It's like one customer's data is
all in a single file and um, wherever
you want to put that only affects that
customer. Do you see what I mean? And so
that's what this is part of what we
pursued. That's what became Mike's
active record tenanted which I know you
talked to him you talked to him about
that recently and he'll have gone into
all the details of that but that was
kind of the idea behind it was it lets
you put data wherever you want without
having to also chop up the rest of your
infrastructure in order to do so if you
see what I'm
>> also gets you the speed that you're
looking for because the data can be
closer to each customer.
>> Exactly. The data can be closer to
people so they get less latency. It's
also quite nice because it it was one of
the roots that could make it practical
to run SQLite as the database server.
Like SQLite can scale to very large
amounts of data and in the right
circumstances. Um but if you want to run
SAS on it, there's some challenges about
like concurrency like how many actions
you can do at the same time on the same
database. Like SQLite limits limits you
to one right at a time. For an
individual customer is probably fine.
That's you can do a lot of writes very
quickly and one customer is only going
to be able to change so many things in a
in a certain space of time that you can
keep up. But if you used one SQLite
database for all your customers, you can
only do one right in your whole
application at one time. You're going to
start actually getting lock contention
bumping up against that. Um just because
lots of customers will try and do things
at the same time. They'll end up waiting
on on locks. But when if you split the
databases up into individual databases,
those types of blocks and those and
those types of kind of limits, they
apply a database level. Um, so now it's
back to each customer can do one thing
at a time, not the whole system could do
one thing at a time.
>> So I have I have a question about that.
It I know this is fizzy infrastructure,
but isn't campfire running with SQLite?
>> Yeah, but we don't run campfire SAS. So
campfire, right?
>> Right. But even even what I'm wondering
about is that each I assume it's each
message needs to be a right.
>> Yeah.
>> So so it's you can scale quite far and
that's not a problem because they're all
so fast.
>> Okay. With Campfire, we did we did run
into it sometimes when we were when we
were first developing Campfire and we
would notice when we had done something
where a right operation was slow like or
if a right operation took too long or
you if you start a transaction try and
do too many things before you commit the
transaction or something like that then
you will start to see that you'll start
to see the requests get held up behind
the one that you're trying to process.
How does that look like for a for
someone like as a user?
>> How like how would you know if that was
happening?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Cuz cuz what you're telling
me is a little bit of like programming
magic, right? Oh, I can see the
transaction and the requests queued up
behind it. But like is that noticeable
for like the end user is it be it would
become noticeable um when it's bad
enough you would feel the sluggishness
of the app is probably what would
happen. Um, so if you start to have
requests waiting on locks, they're sort
of queuing up. And so a thing that you
would try and do like posting a message
>> should normally be really fast, but you
might post it and be waiting for the
response to come back because it's
waiting to try and get the lock on the
on the database,
>> if you see what I mean.
>> Yeah, that makes sense. Um so generally
when working with one of the things we
learned um with campfire I think was
when working with SQLite it's good to be
conscious of
how long you're likely to be taking
locks for. So you would keep your right
operations short and efficient. Don't
hold transactions open while you sort
like because you know you can if you
want a bunch of statements to work as an
atomic unit with the database. You can
start a transaction you can do some work
then you can go off and do some other
things in your Ruby code while you
finish processing things and then you
can do more and then commit the
transaction and that whole time in see
in the SQLite world that whole time you
would have a right lock that you'd be
blocking anybody else from writing to
the database. So it just makes you be a
bit more careful about that. And one
more one more question about that is
that I assume that Rails is prepared for
that. It just cues up the requests. This
isn't like a a Rails limitation. It's a
a SQLite limitation.
>> Yeah, it's a SQLite limitation. Exactly.
>> So, so you could have like the right
log, whatever, and Rails is happy to
wait until you release that log and then
continue
>> Yeah.
>> processing the request.
>> Exactly. Um,
>> Rails doesn't even really
>> know about it. I mean, as long as you
don't hit some kind of timeout or
something that you've set up, wouldn't
even really know. It just asks the
database to do something and that takes
some amount of time.
>> It's just that that would slow down.
>> Um,
>> I mean, but as I say, if you if you keep
your transactions short, it doesn't tend
to come up a lot in in SQLite. At least
if you're using SQLite with the right
mode, you have to use it in wall mode
and that kind of thing. But um you can
go pretty far with it. But once you get
into the world of running SAS with lots
of customers, then you would you would
start hitting those limits.
>> And so that was part of what was I think
interesting about this idea of giving
everyone their own SQLite database
because that meant since we're not had
these logs then it could be practical to
run SQLite as our SAS database rather
than my SQL. And that has some really
nice properties. And one of them that's
nice for speed
as well as the thing of getting the data
close to people to cut down on latency.
There's another effect that's happening
which is more about getting the data
close to the app server. So like
normally if you use something like my
SQL you you'll have a Rails server
somewhere and a MySQL server running
somewhere else. And whenever it needs to
do anything with the database, there's a
network call between the two. And
they'll they'll be close together in the
same data center. Usually it's usually a
very fast network call, but still it
does add it adds some time.
>> But why is this is this like a
I don't know a CPU limitation where you
want to run them separately. Usually,
you'll want to run them separately, but
partly for resources, partly for scaling
because you'll you want to be able to
add more of one without necessarily the
other, if you see what I mean. So for
example, you might you might start with
having two app servers and one database
and that's enough load. But then as you
get more customers, you might find your
app servers are quite busy, but the data
the database server is fine. And so you
can add more app servers and get more
capacity there rather than, you know, I
mean, if they were just on the same one
box and it got busy, you just have to
keep making that a bigger and bigger
box. Um,
>> that makes sense. So yeah, so this thing
where because SQLite works, it's not on
a separate server. It's not even a
separate process um from your like your
Rails process. So anytime you need to
access the database, it doesn't have to
go across the network. It doesn't even
have to go from one process to another
and make some kind of IPC call. It can
just directly carry out the query. It
just grabs the data from disk. Or if
quite often a lot of the active data
will be cached, so it's basically
pulling stuff out of memory. So it's
really really fast and it's quite it's
it's enough of a difference to be
noticeable I would say like in I think
often in a typical web application a
request might do I don't know a handful
of database operations a handful of
queries um things that have to be
separate queries really because they're
unrelated things if you see what I mean
like quite often you'll be loading up
the user record to make sure they've got
permission to see what they're looking
at you'll be querying for whatever it is
they're trying to see like the the fizzy
card that they want to look at or
something and maybe there's some sidebar
content with a menu and you're cool like
so you probably do a handful of
different database operations and with a
client server database like um like my
SQL that's a handful of back and forth
back and forth between machines
when you do it with my SQL and and
you're not doing it back and forth like
it is a noticeable difference like my
SQL is super fast uh sorry SQLite sorry
is super fast when you when you use it
that way so that was one of the other
things that was nice was like okay with
this architecture we'll get all the
speed of having our databases inside the
process and we'll be able to move them
close to the people so fast and yeah
that was one of the things that kind of
drove us to chase this for a while I
think
>> I mean it sounds like a big win tell us
when we started going down that path
what happened or what did we find
>> so
a lot of it turns out quite to go quite
well but I think it it starts to get a
little bit complicated just because
although those are those are the nice
advantages to um to that kind of
architecture. Basically the the nice
parts of using SQLite means that the
data is right there inside your Rails
process. But the the flip side to that
is that now your data lives on the same
has to live on the same machine as your
app server. Like it it can't you can't
just put a database server somewhere and
then have however many app servers you
need that all talk to it. And as you're
as you get more load and more customers,
you can add more app servers. Like they
have to be on the same machine. So if
you want to increase capacity, then you
can add servers, but then you also have
to like move the data. So you have to
like take some of your customers that
were stored on server A and put those on
server B. Um, which starts to become a
bit more complicated.
You also have to have a way to not have
each particular server be the only place
that that customer's data customer's
data lives. And you need to have some
kind of redundant copies because that
machine could fail suddenly and then you
don't have access to that customer's
data. If you want to do the uh spread
out the reload to multiple machines um
like we talked about before then that
also needs a way to replicate data from
one server to another because otherwise
it's always in the in that one place.
One thing I probably should have
mentioned about this idea of making data
close to people is it sort of assumes
that people tend to be accessing the
data for the same place. So you expect
all your customers should if they if all
your customers work in Edinburgh and you
put your data in Edinburgh that's great
for them but if they're like 37 signals
and everyone's spread all over the world
there's not really a good spot that's
good for everybody. So you can't avoid
still trying to find some way of doing
the thing of like well we can spread the
read only copies around and everyone
gets fast reads like you still need to
do those types of things if you want to
to work well in in situations like that
if you see what I mean when you want to
do that with SQL light it doesn't there
wasn't really a good way that we found
to just do that with existing software
that kind of fit our use case well we
had so we had to build that part too so
there's one of the one of the places
where the the seemingly simple
architecture starts to get like a bigger
project, a bigger project cuz you're
like, well, we this bit is good, but we
also need to build this other thing. We
also need to build this other thing. And
so it starts to grow arms and legs a
little bit.
>> And some of these concepts like seem
deceptively simple, right? Like from
what when from what we learned yesterday
with the with Mike, like SQL light is
just a file.
>> So it at at first it seems like quite
simple like you just copy the file
everywhere, right? You just like do it
right and then copy the file somewhere
else.
>> Yeah, like that should suffice. And then
I assume that when you start doing
something simple like that, oh there's
this edge case that you know what when
this happens.
>> Yeah, exactly. It is just a file but
it's a file that is being changed in
various different parts of it
potentially very quickly. Um and you
need so in the case of replication you
want another copy of it that you can use
for reads. Then whatever changes in that
first file has to change in that second
file. But it has to do it really quickly
and it has to only do the parts that
change. Not it can't recopy the whole
file because it'll get too big. You
would end up trying to send far too much
data across across the network if like
every time you made a change you copy
the whole file.
>> How big is a SQL light file like in in
in your experience while we were testing
this?
>> Well, so it really depends since it's
per customer. I mean I think a lot of
customers will be quite small. So like
megabytes probably big big customers
might be a gigabyte or something.
They're not they're not massive but
they're big enough that
>> you could copy the whole thing each time
>> someone changes one. Right. You need to
you need to at least find out what's the
part that changed and then just apply
that change.
>> Yeah. Um, and you want to do it as close
to instantly as possible because you
want people to be able to use those
readonly copies for to access all the
reads without them kind of getting
behind and showing stale information if
you see what I mean. So, we built a
system for replication. We also we did
build in something about that notion of
stale information because you can't make
the replication actually instant.
There's always going to be some amount
of delay and usually it should be short
but I think there's always the potential
that it's slow it gets held up for some
reason because you essentially you're
sending you're sending changes across
networks between servers. If a lot of
changes happen in one place it's
possible that it might take a moment for
all of those changes to kind of get
across the network get applied in the
other side. It shouldn't normally be
long. should be like well under a second
most of the time but there's always a
chance that a lot happens suddenly or
something or just computers you know um
it might just get get slow for a little
bit um so you usually need some
mechanism to make sure that what people
are looking at is not stale data you
wouldn't notice stale data really if you
weren't the one making the change like
if if you're looking at a page that
someone's updating and it takes two
seconds for the change to show up.
You're probably just not going to know
like you didn't know it was there until
you saw it and that was in 2 seconds is
nothing. But the case that quite often
comes up is if you change something and
then you go to another page where like
you make a new post um add a new card in
Fizzy or something and then you go to
the list of cards. If yours isn't there
because you read from a server that
didn't have it yet, it's going to look
broken. Normally, or I think most
commonly, the way people handle that,
which we do in some other apps, is just
have a a short delay where you pin your
activity to the place where you wrote
it. So, when you make the change, it has
to go where where the writer is. when
you go to make a read, normally you
would read it from the reader, but
because the system knows that you just
wrote something, it'll make sure that
you actually read from the writer for
the next second or something, which
works well, but it does mean that more
of the requests go to the writer than
have to um because you're sort of it's
like a pessimistic kind of approach,
right? It's like we don't know if it's
on the other place yet. So, we'll just
assume the worst and keep serving you
from the writer for a couple of seconds
until until we're sure it would be
there. So, in the uh the architecture
that we were building for Fizzy, we were
quite conscious of
trying to avoid doing any more work on
the writer than we absolutely had to
because we have these kind of tighter
restrictions about how many writes we
can push through each app server and how
many customers can go on each app server
as a result. So we took a different
approach there and instead we we
actually track what the ID of the last
transaction is that you wrote and then
every time when your request comes in
we're able to
assume that it's probably safe to serve
it from the reader and send you to the
reader but detect if we were wrong. And
so in those rare cases where you your
next request goes to the reader and it
doesn't yet have the transaction you
just wrote at that point it can quickly
kind of resubmit the request to the to
the writer to get the fresh copy which
means
it's potentially might be a wee bit
slower if that happens but that very
very rarely happens. So it gives you the
protection to never seem broken but with
the more optimistic behavior that it's
fine to just read from the reader all
the time. I feel like we just went down
like a really deep rabbit hole there.
Like I forgot what we were talking about
before we went down there.
>> I No, no, no. I think this is great. The
uh the the reason is like it's it seems
like wow like it seems so simple at
first and and there is I'm sure you felt
this and you and the team felt this but
there I'm sure the desire to make
something like SQL like work was really
really high. It was I mean I think it
was it was at the start because it
seemed cool basically like we liked you
know I mean the advantages seemed good
also it just seemed like a fun thing to
do and we all grew to really like SQL
light a lot like I think we all a few of
us had used it and quite liked for other
things but the more we worked with it
we're like this thing is cool we just
want to make this work and use this and
I I think also there's a thing where the
more time you spend on a project you
also get a little bit like emotionally
attached to it and there's a there's
there's a we get to point like I'm going
to make it work because I said I was
going to make it work that like it's not
going to beat me. I'm going to do this
>> which actually I think probably
for me at least it it led me to chase it
for a bit longer than I think like in
hindsight I think there was a point
where I probably it would have been
better to stop realize that some things
weren't going quite the way we wanted to
and then change tech earlier but instead
I was like so determined to make it work
because it mostly did as well. That's
the thing like most of this
did turn out to work really quite well.
>> Right. Right. And I was going to say
there it doesn't there doesn't seem to
be like a a huge wall right in front of
you. Right. It was just like tiny
pebbles that made you like, "Oh, yeah.
>> I need to clean this up. I need to move
this here."
>> And but they just kept coming.
>> Yeah. I would Well,
>> or was there something like huge where
you're like, "Oh,
>> I don't think there was anything so much
huge." Um, I actually think it was a bit
more of a
it became a timing issue to get it done
because it did turn out to be quite
quite big and quite hard to crack. So
the the way it played out in practice
was that we we built some of the parts
of this first. Um we had the the
tenanted SQLite par. We had replication
working. We set things up. So we had one
one app server that was the writer and
then we had a couple of readers that
replicated from that. We set up um the
sort of geoloccation routting stuff. We
use cloudflare's cloudflare is a load
balancer service that you can use to
sort of direct traffic to one of your
like to the nearest data center from
your data centers. Um so we put these
servers in different places. is we had
traffic ruing to the right one and that
worked really well and that's what we
used internally for for a long time. Um
we had the sort of small group the sort
of invite only early testers group that
were using fizzy for a while were
running on this and it was great. It was
super fast um and worked really reliably
but as we started to to add the sort of
the multiple writer part there's a
there's a lot of things in there that
are quite difficult to get right. Um, so
it took a while I think to land on a
design for that that we liked. We got
there in the end, but we were already
like we're getting like later and later
the project. And so we we're working on
the infrastructure part while um it's
basically for the the longest time it
was just Mike and myself working on this
and then Stano joined. So there's three
of us towards the end. But while we're
doing that there's other people working
on the product. And so early on it's
great. You have all the time in the
world because they haven't built the
product yet. So you can take your time
figuring out the infrastructure, but we
get to a point where the product's like
good to go, ready to go out the door,
and we're not quite ready with the
infrastructure. We still have some some
things to to figure out there. And for a
little while, you could kind of get away
with that. We can we can be like, well,
if we need a couple more weeks to finish
something up, then they'll add more
things to the product for a couple more
week. There's always more things to add.
But I think we were getting to the point
where it started to feel like we're
going to we're going to end up slowing
this down. Like we're going to end up
not being able to release a thing we've
built just because we still have
questions on our side. We figured out
how we wanted to do the MLY writer
thing. We built that kind of towards the
last minute in terms in project terms at
the last minute. Um we got that stuff
all working. But I think the for me
there were two there were two problems
that were kind of staring at like one
was that
although we got this although we kind of
got this stuff working we had intended
to do a lot more preparation in terms of
how we were going to run this and make
sure that we we were prepared for
whatever happened. So having run books
for how to handle operational situations
if like a machine breaks or like if if
something goes wrong with the
replication and it gets and there's a
lot of replication lag how do we deal
with that? There were a lot of things
that we ideally would have sort of
practiced and researched and written up
so we knew that we were prepared so that
when we launched this for real if
anything went wrong we could quickly
recover. And we had we hadn't really
done enough of that by that point,
mostly because we were so busy figuring
out these these other questions that we
we had to kind of keep pushing that um
further down the line. Same with
benchmarking. We' done some basic
benchmarking to know how fast this was
and we knew that it was pretty fast
those tests. But I think there's always
the potential that there's there's kind
of limits and ceilings that you haven't
uncovered yet. And to be confident in
releasing the app, I think we needed to
have spent a bit more time um trying out
different benchmarking scenarios knowing
that if loads and loads of people sign
up on day one, it's not going to catch
fire because of sublimmit that we didn't
know about or something. So that was
like half of the concern was just
not being quite ready enough to do it in
a responsible way. Like we could have
shipped it and lodged it. I think it
would have probably been fine, but if it
wasn't fine, I think we would have had a
bad time and we would we risked having
an app that broke, which no one wants.
Right.
>> It's all fun in games until you get the
customer data loss.
>> Exactly. Right. Because all this time
we've been running internally. It was
working well, but
>> the stakes were low at that point
because if it broke, we would just go, I
wonder what went wrong. We would fix it
and we put it back together. But I think
the point where it's out in the wild and
people are using it and also especially
that early early point where you're
trying to tell the world you've made
this new thing and you want everybody to
come and look at it at the same time
like you don't want it to break in that
in that moment. And
as I say I don't it's not that I thought
it would break but it was more that I
didn't feel
confident enough that we had made sure
it wasn't or or that we had made sure
that we could fix it really fast if it
did. We just there was an amount of
preparation that we hadn't been able to
do in time I think. So that was half of
it. The other reason though was that for
all that we liked about that
architecture,
the longer we worked with it, I think we
started to feel like there were some
parts we didn't like about it as well,
there's some parts that become harder.
And a lot of it just boils down to that
same
it's that same constraint that you have
where if you're using SQLite and your
data is where your app server is then
even though you can have your read only
copies and you can read from multiple
machines if you want to change the data
you have to change the data on a
specific machine if you've divided your
data up per customer then most of the
time that's fine because usually you you
know for any specific request this is
only for this customer I know which
machine has their data. I can route the
request to the right place and they can
do the right there. But sometimes you
have requests that aren't like that.
There's some things that do span
customers like so for us it came up with
things like the way login works like
when you want to log in you need a way
to
um enter your credentials and get
authenticated before we can show you
here's all your accounts. like those
accounts are essentially the different
tenants and so we need to find out we
need to kind of get you authenticated,
show your list of different accounts
even though they're all on different
machines. So the information about you
and how you log in can't be just in each
of your tenants. It's sort of it's a
layer above that. It's across all of
those. And so we would as we were
working on kind of that side of it, we
started to run into these situations
where things that seemed like they
should be easy were hard because you
would have a you'd have a feature like I
think one was that we had
I'm trying to remember the exact detail.
It was something like we wanted to make
it so that your profile picture wasn't
per account but was like per person. You
have the same profile picture regardless
of accounts. And initially we had built
this into the tenant database because it
was a per account thing. Changing that
normally would be super easy. But in
this architecture we're like well how we
don't even know like which database is
holding the information about what your
profile picture is and if it's not the
machine where your account's on. Now the
request to this machine has to talk to
this other machine. Um and we kind of
worked our way through it but we just
started to feel like we made things
harder for ourselves here. Like there's
a lot we liked where we
we were we I don't know. I was going to
say where we made things easier for
ourel. I don't know if it's exactly fair
to say we made things easier for
ourselves, but more like we there was a
lot where we could do things the way we
normally did and get benefits. But then
there's these other cases where we're
like this is kind of awkward. I like I
don't actually know if we're going to be
pleased that we did this like a year
from now when the app's growing and we
have lots of customers and we're trying
to add new features. Are we going to be
kicking ourselves for setting it up in
this particular way? If you see what I
mean? And and I don't think
it's super clear right now whether it
would have been like a thing we were
happy about or a thing we weren't happy
about, but there was doubt. And so I
think the the combination of we're not
quite ready to go with this and the but
the app is ready the product is ready to
go. that combined with and we're not
even really that sure we still want it
anymore kind of thing. That's why we
decided that the right thing to do for
that situation was actually unwind some
of that and go back to a more
traditional for us architecture and ship
on that.
>> And I believe what's interesting about
this is that it's in the git history,
right?
>> It is. Yeah. So actually I can show you
I have um
I bookmarked the right PR for this in
case you're so I could kind of show
>> the exact point in time where we're like
yeah
>> yeah because it was
>> so it it was a dramatic week in some
ways. Um, so this the decision to to go
from what we were going to do to what
like this PR here is called plan B
because we always had this idea in mind
that like if this didn't work out the
plan B was that we would just um convert
the app to run on my SQL use the same
kind of setup that we typically use um
for our other apps. And so the decision
to do that like I think the the date on
this uh says November today. I can't
remember the dates very well but if this
if this is November 18th that probably
means that I think November
19th probably was the planned day for
shipping the app. And I think the day
before this PR is probably when when I
kind of went like I don't think this is
going to work. I think it was a it was
on a a Sunday evening I pinged David to
say I think we should change I think we
should do plan B like we should bail on
the new architecture and it was like
literally like 2 days before we were
supposed to ship it.
>> That must have been difficult.
Um, it was like in like like I said
earlier, I think like in hindsight
I it makes sense like it still feels
like that that was it was the
appropriate thing to do in that
situation for all the reasons that we
just talked talked about at the time.
But at the time of doing that, it was
quite a hard thing to do because we'd
invested a lot of time in it. I was
really, like I say, like I was
determined to make it work. There was I
was some I was kind of attached a bit to
the idea of shipping this. It felt like
failure to not do it. I knew it was the
right decision to do, but at the same
time like you get for one thing, you get
kind of emotionally attached a bit to
the project you work on for a long time,
I think. Um, but also we had talked
about this a lot. Like I I gave a talk
at Rails World about Beamer and how we
were using it for Fizzy. And David in
his keynote talked about how we were we
were doing this whole new architecture.
We're going to, you know, change the
world with this new architecture. So all
of a sudden to be like, you know, we're
not actually going to be doing that.
It's hard to not have that in your mind
when you're deciding to change the plan.
For sure.
>> Just knocking on David's door like,
"Hey,
>> a second."
>> It's like, "Sorry, I told you we were
going to do this thing cuz we're now
we're not going to do this thing." But
it did really feel like the choice
between like you either just kind of put
your hands up and say, "You know what?
This this doesn't this hasn't worked
out. We need to do something else." or
the only other option would be to kind
of go ahead and do it while not feeling
confident that it was the right choice
if you see what I mean which just that
option just isn't really an option I
think
>> it's it's already been a few months and
fizzes out people love it like they
really really love it do you see it like
as a failure or is this just like
software development
mostly the latter so I think it was I
think exploring this made a lot of sense
I think we learned a lot from this.
There's things that we took out of this
like fizzy
although we reverted to a more
conventional for us architecture, it's
not exactly the same. Like we did get to
keep some things from our explorations
on the other on the other architecture.
So for example, the thing I described
there about dealing with replication lag
by tracking the transaction that you
wrote rather than pinning your all your
reads to the writer for some period of
time that we figured out how to do that
when working on this new architecture.
And since when we switched to plan B, we
kept that idea and we ported it to the
MySQL side. So now Fizzy still has that
improvement um because we had put the
work in while we were doing the other
stuff. And there's a couple other things
like that like we
part of that part that I didn't really
talk about much earlier there was that
as well as replication and um this the
database location stuff the other thing
that you have to do in all of this is
rooting requests to the right machines
like you have to have a more
I don't know the right word to call it
but like more dynamic I guess sort of
routting so when requests come in on a
particular data center it has to
which is the right server for this
customer for this action. And so there's
a bit more behavior going on at that
kind of level. And so we built a bunch
of stuff into Camal proxy which is the
proxy server that we have in Camal or
deployment tool. Um we built a bunch of
load balancing features into it so that
we could build this this original
architecture. But when we switched to
the other the MySQL version that it
turned out to still be really good to be
able to do this at that level. So we
still use Camal proxy as a load
balancer. We have like six load
balancers that run fizzy that are all um
Camal proxy using the same new stuff
that we had built originally for the
first architecture if you see what I
mean. So we did we did take some stuff
out of it. We didn't throw all away but
we did change a lot. So I I was going to
show you the PR just to give you a sense
of what what the work was like to do it
because it's quite a um it was quite a
sudden and big change in a sense. Um, so
one thing I didn't mention is that
there's like 14 participants. It says on
here like a couple of these are just
people who I think commentate and
discuss things. So it's not exactly 14,
but there was probably like eight or 10
people involved in doing this change. It
has tons of tons of commits. It's one of
those things that GitHub is not very
good at displaying because it has too
many things, but it's basically like a
week of work by the whole team. Um, so
it was kind of a intense week where we
all said, "All right, let's make this
work. Let's go with plan B." And we all
made the changes. The changes
themselves, most of them are not
actually that
difficult or or complicated. It's just
that there's a lot of them. Um,
so I don't know if it's if it's
interesting to see the sort of thing
that we had to do to change this. I
could probably point a couple of things.
>> Yeah, let's do that. The way this played
out, you could see at the start, I
actually don't know why this first
committed. That wasn't on the PR before.
That's just a weird get history thing,
but we basically started by like pulling
stuff out. So, Beamer's the replication
system that we built. Um, so like we
weren't going to need the replication
anymore. We weren't going to need this
test bed, which was there to um test how
replication worked across machines. Um,
we added the trilogy adapter, which is
the MySQL adapter. We took our active
recording testing. And so you can see we
basically started this project where
we're like take out all the new stuff um
set it up on my SQL and then there's a
bunch of like and then make it work
things. So there's a lot of um updating
queries, fixing tests um and stuff like
that until it until it worked um against
my SQL. And a lot of it was as you just
as you just described just now there's a
lot of places where in the tenant need
world the database had the data for just
that one customer or that one account
and that's usually the level that you
query things at. So we didn't have if
you want to look up your account we
didn't have to say like find the account
for the customer. We could just say
accounts soul. It would just be like the
account um and that would give us the
account information. And if we wanted to
get um a list of all the boards in your
physique account, we just query for all
the boards because they're all your
account because the database they're in.
Um obviously once you stop tenanting and
you go into this model where one big
MySQL database has everybody's data,
then you have to you go through like if
we find the
uh the models down there. If you look at
something like board uh
system model um yeah there's tons of
this sort stuff. So board had to had to
have a belongs to account because before
it didn't matter. There only was one
account. Now um it has to have that
relationship and then all the places
where we do queries we have to make sure
that we're actually accessing things
through current account or current user
rather than just like the only account.
Um, so there's a lot of kind of
mechanical changes that are of that sort
of form.
Um,
>> Kevin, is this made any more complicated
because we had beta testers like people
with actual account data, not just our
team in there? Did that make any of this
like change unraveling any more complex
or would it have been the same
regardless?
>> It's a bit it was a bit more complicated
because yeah, we had people using it. We
wanted to make sure that everyone's data
was preserved properly and we also
didn't want to interrupt their use of it
too much. Even though it was
pre-release, so it was sort of okay to
say we're taking it down for
maintenance, but we want to minimize the
interruptions. So yeah, we couldn't just
start fresh with a new database. We had
to write scripts that imported the data
from the uh all the individual tenite
databases and then kind of copied them
into the MySQL world. I saw I saw in one
of the commits that it says remove
Beamer. Uh Beamer is not yet open
source, is it? Uh so it's not yet. Um I
want to I want to open source it, but we
there's a couple of things I wanted to
tidy up to make sure it was ready before
it goes out. Um and because we were
quite busy getting Fizzy launched at the
point where we stopped we decided we
weren't using it, I kind of haven't
really had a chance to go back and just
make sure it's ready. I think like it it
works. we were we were using it for a
long time. Um, but there are just like a
couple of rough edges that I don't want
there. And I think I want to share it
because we built it and I I think it
works quite well. It's it's super fast.
Um, it turned out to be pretty reliable.
But I think as soon as you share
something, you kind of
you only want to do that if if you're
ready for other people to use it, if you
see what I mean. Like I don't want to
share it and saying, "But it's a bit
wonky over here." or um or not be around
to help if someone has questions or
something. Do you see what I mean? Like
kind of want to do it like share it
responsibly if you see what I mean. So I
will
>> I think that's really interesting. How
do you marry that with like David's very
famous the gift philosophy?
>> I do think it's a gift. I think you you
can give things uh to people and they
don't they don't h I don't think people
have the right to like demand that you
start doing certain things like add
features that they want if you don't
want them like I think that's kind of
where the gift thing come from right
it's like if you make a thing and you
think other people can benefit from it
and you want to give it to them then you
can and they don't really they're not
really entitled to then demand more
things it's a gift they could take it or
leave it they could build their own if
they don't like the one that you made
Um, I think that's fine, but I do think
there's also there's an amount of just
um giving people something in like in a
good form. Like you don't you don't want
to sort of like waste people's time by
saying like I built this thing, it's 95%
done, you know, it's up to you to finish
it or something. You know what I mean?
It's sort of a balance though. I think
>> I get it. And this is still your baby in
a way, right? Like I know this is a team
effort and everything, but for from what
I've heard, Beamer is like something
you've poured a lot of time into.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Because although all these
things are they're team efforts, but
we're a small team, right? So in
practice in practice, you might find
that there's two people or three people
working on a thing and there's two or
three things that you need to make for
it to work. So you tend to end up each
having a thing. Um, a lot of the things
we build end up being mostly built by
one person, especially those kind of
like supporting tools and stuff. It's
usually one person that came up with an
idea and built a thing. So,
>> this path that we went down with fizzy
infrastructure that we didn't end up
using, do you imagine that in the future
we'll revisit it. We'll try to go back
to it given more time. It seems like
there was a a time element where the
product was ready, the backend wasn't.
Given enough time, do you think it's
something you'd want to reexplore?
>> I think there's parts of it that we want
to reexplore. I think
we learned a lot from it that I think
informed how we would do it again if we
were to do it again. And I think I don't
know that we would go back and exactly
continue that same journey and finish
the exact same thing. But I think there
were some things that we
thought that we were hoping to get out
of it that we ended up because we didn't
ship on that version. We don't have
these things that we might want to go
back and say, well, how do they how
would they apply in this new
architecture, you know? So, like one of
the things I that I'd really like to
look at and we'll try to do that soon, I
think, is
is some other form of doing the local
writers to people. So even though we're
not we don't have individual tenant
databases per customer that we can move
around to different places right now we
have one big MySQL database with
everybody but we could have like four or
five or something. You could have like
the European database, the East US, the
West US and segment customers into a
small number of large databases and use
a lot of the existing like the load
balancer routting that we already built.
I think like we could we could apply a
lot of what we built for the MySQL
version onto the sorry for the SQLite
version. We could apply a lot of that
onto a sort of MySQL
sort of form of this and still get that
benefit of now you're now like my data
could be in my SQL in Amsterdam and so
it's fast me here in Edinburgh. So I
think that's more like where we might go
back and look at it's like what could we
pick and choose from the things that we
did and apply them in this place.
>> Yeah, that makes sense. listening to
what Mike had to say uh had to say about
like active record being tenant
multi-tenant and all of this it seems
like there's like the the gem that he's
uh working on the commal proxy load
balancing stuff the uh beamer which in
in the future may may come up and fizzy
overall there was no actual real harm
done by this exploration it seems to be
that it was like a net win even if like
we didn't get 100% of everything that we
wanted, right?
>> Uh yeah. Yeah. I I think so. I think it
was a really useful exploration. Um I
think we learned a lot of stuff and like
with some of the things you just
mentioned, there are things that we we
have kept. It's not like none of it
shipped. It was more that we shipped
some parts, we didn't ship other parts,
but we we did still get quite a lot out
of it. Um, I think like I'm quite
excited about some of the load balancing
stuff that we built into Kamal proxy and
that I think will be genuinely useful to
a lot of people. We still have a little
bit of work there to make it easier for
people to uh to set up those load
balancers and we're going to add some
things to Camal to do it, but I think
that's actually going to be really nice
for people and that came out of that
work. Um, so I think it was all good. I
think like I said earlier, I think the
one part in hindsight
I would have liked to notice like maybe
one month sooner than I did that we were
going to change our mind. So instead of
having that like 2 days before launch
going let's change everything and then
we had to have that crazy week. I think
it would probably would be good to
notice slightly earlier. Um, but other
than that, I don't I don't regret
looking into it. And I I do think that
it was Yeah, it was the right thing to
explore and it was also the right choice
in the end to go where we went. So, I
think I think it's all good.
>> Yeah. Well, thanks for sharing all of
that with us. This has been an episode
of Recordables, which is a production of
37 Signals. To hear more from our
technical team, check out their blog at
dev. 37signals.com.